1. What is oop and why is it important?
    "OOP stands for Object-Oriented Programming. It’s a programming style where everything is organized as objects, which are instances of classes.
    Each object contains data (fields) and behavior (methods). OOP helps make code more modular, reusable, and easier to understand."

    🔹 Why OOP is Important:
        ✅ Modularity – Code is organized into classes and objects.
        🔁 Reusability – You can reuse code using inheritance.
        🛡️ Security – Encapsulation hides internal data from outside interference.
        🔧 Flexibility – Polymorphism lets you change behavior without changing code.
        🌳 Scalability – It's easier to manage large programs.

2. What are classes and objects?
    Class : A blueprint or template for creating objects.
            it defines properties(attributes) and method(functions) that an object have.

            eg. class Dog { .... };

    Object: An instance of a class.
            It represent a real-world entity with properties and behavior.

            eg. Dog d1;

3. what are the four pillars of OOPs? 
    🔹 1. Encapsulation – "Data hiding"
            It means wrapping data and code together inside a class.
            We hide internal details and only expose necessary parts.
            Achieved using private variables and public getter/setter methods.
        
            eg. Car class with private speed, accessed via methods.
    
    🔹 2. Abstraction – "Hiding complexity"
            Shows only important things, hides complex internal logic.
            Done using abstract classes or interfaces.
    
    🔹 3. Inheritance – "Reusing code"
            One class (child) can reuse code from another class (parent).
            Helps reduce code duplication.
    
    🔹 4. Polymorphism – "One name, many forms"
            Same method behaves differently depending on the object.
            Two types: Compile-time (method overloading) and Run-time (method overriding).

4. How do call one constructor from another?
        we can achieve this using constructor Chaining.
        Constrcutor chaining is the process of calling one constructor from another within the same class or from the base class.
        Purpose : To reuse code and avoid duplication when initialising an object.

        Two types:
            Within the same class : this() keyword.
            from base/parent class : super() keyword.

        class Animal {
            Animal(String type) {
                System.out.println("Animal constructor called: " + type);
            }
        }

        class Dog extends Animal {
            Dog() {
                this("Tommy");  // Calls the second constructor of Dog
                System.out.println("Default Dog constructor"); //3
            }

            Dog(String name) {
                super("Dog");  // Calls parent class constructor //1
                System.out.println("Dog constructor with name: " + name); //2
            }
        }

        public class Main {
            public static void main(String[] args) {
                Dog d = new Dog();
            }
        }

        OUTPUT:
            Animal constructor called: Dog  
            Dog constructor with name: Tommy  
            Default Dog constructor

5. What are yhe Access Specifiers and their Purpose?
    public : Accessible everywhere across the program, inside and outside the class and package.
    private : Accessible only within the same class.
    Protected : Accessible within the same package and by subclass in different packages.

6. What are Manipulators in Java ?
    "Manipulators are tools used to format output when printing data to the console.
        eg. System.out.printf() or String.format()."

    They help control: Number of decimal places, Field width, Padding, Alignment (left/right)

    // Right-align with width 10
        System.out.printf("Number: %10d\n", num);    //Number:         42
    // Two decimal places
        System.out.printf("Price: %.2f\n", price);   //Price: 123.46
    // Left-align
        System.out.printf("Left-aligned: %-10dEnd\n", num); // Left-aligned: 42        End

7. What is the diff. b/w Deep copy and Shallow copy ?
    In shallow copy, both objects share the same internal references.
    In deep copy, everything is duplicated, so changes in one object won’t affect the other."

    eg. shallow copy
        ABC obj1=new ABC();
        ABC obj2 =obj1;
            obj2.x=6;
        // obj1.x=6 will happen 

        //deep copy
        ABC obj1=new ABC();
        ABC obj2=new ABC();
         obj2.x=6;
         // obj1.x=30 will remaim same
        
8. What do you mean by Abstract class ? Can we Intantiate the Abstract class?
    "An abstract class is a blueprint that can contain both abstract and non-abstract methods.
    We cannot instantiate it directly, but we can inherit it and provide implementations in child classes.
    It's used when we want to define common behavior but leave some methods to be implemented by subclasses."

    abstract methods (without body) as well as concrete methods (with body).

9. What is an Interface in JAVA , how does it promote Abstraction ? Provide a simple example.
    "An interface in Java is like a contract that defines a set of methods but doesn’t provide their implementation.
    It’s used to achieve 100% abstraction and to define what a class should do, not how it does it."

    🔹 How Interface Promotes Abstraction:
        "Interfaces promote abstraction by hiding the implementation details.
        They let us write code that focuses only on behavior, not how it's achieved internally.

10. Discuss about Exception handling in Java?    
    "Exception Handling in Java is a way to handle runtime errors so that the normal flow of the application is not interrupted
        Java provides a robust way to catch and handle exceptions using try, catch, finally, and throw keywords."
    🔹 Keywords Summary:
        try: Wraps code that might throw an exception.
        catch: Handles the exception.
        finally: Executes code no matter what (optional).
        throw: Used to throw an exception manually.
        throws: Declares an exception might be thrown by a method.

11. What is constructor and How can we overload them?
    "A constructor is a special method in Java that is used to create and initialize an object.
    It has the same name as the class, no return type, and is automatically called when an object is created."

    Constructor overloading means defining multiple constructors with different parameter lists in the same class.
        Constructor overloading lets us initialize objects in different ways by changing the number or type of parameters."

12. What do you mean by Polymorphism? State the Difference between Static and Dynamic Polymorphism?
        "Polymorphism means 'many forms'. In Java, it allows objects to behave differently based on their context, even if they share the same interface or method name

        🔹 Two Types of Polymorphism in Java:
            Type	                Also Known As	   How It's Achieved	                    Resolved At
            Static Polymorphism	    Compile-Time	   Method Overloading	                    Compile Time
            Dynamic Polymorphism	Run-Time	       Method Overriding (with Inheritance)	    Run Time

13. What is coupling?
    "Coupling shows the level of dependency between classes.
    Tight coupling is bad for flexibility.
    Loose coupling is better because it makes the code easier to maintain, test, and reuse."

14. Explain Inheritance and its type?
        "Inheritance means one class can reuse the properties and behaviors (methods) of another class.
        It helps in code reusability and creating a relationship between classes.

        🔹 Types of Inheritance in Java:
            Single Inheritance
                One class inherits from one superclass.
                ✅ Supported in Java.

            Multilevel Inheritance
                A class inherits from a class which is already a subclass.
                ✅ Supported in Java.

            Hierarchical Inheritance
                Multiple classes inherit from a single superclass.
                ✅ Supported in Java.

            Multiple Inheritance (with classes)
                One class inherits from two classes.
                ❌ Not supported directly in Java (to avoid confusion).
                ✅ But Java supports it using interfaces.

15. Explain Virtual keyword?
16. what is diamont problem in oop?
    "The Diamond Problem is a situation in multiple inheritance where a class inherits from two classes that have a common parent.
    This can cause confusion for the compiler about which method to use from the common parent."