Data Redundancy:- when the same piece of data is stored in multiple places.

Data Isolation refers to the separation of data across different databases or systems(multiple files and formats).

Integrity in databases refers to the accuracy, consistency, and reliability of data over its lifecycle.
    It is maintained using integrity constraints like primary keys, foreign keys, and normalization to prevent errors and inconsistencies.

Inconsistency occurs when different versions of the same data exist across multiple locations, leading to conflicts and errors.

Concurrent access by multiple users occurs when multiple users try to access or modify the same data simultaneously, which can lead to inconsistencies, data loss, or conflicts.
    It is managed using locking mechanisms, transactions, and concurrency control techniques


                    ER diagram
An ER (Entity-Relationship) diagram is a visual representation of a database's structure, showing entities (tables), attributes (columns), and relationships between them
    It helps in designing and understanding database schemas efficiently.

conceptual Model:-A Conceptual Model is a high-level database design that represents the overall structure of data using entities, attributes, and relationships without focusing on technical detail

The logical structure of a database defines how data is logically stored, organized, and related using tables, schemas, relationships, constraints, and normalization


The physical structure of a database refers to how data is physically stored on storage devices
     It includes data files, indexes, partitions, and access methods (e.g., B-trees) that affect storage efficiency and retrieval speed.

                Constraints:

1.A domain constraint restricts the possible values that an attribute (column) can take
    Age INT CHECK (Age BETWEEN 18 AND 65)

2. Tuple Uniqueness Constraint:  every tuple (row) in a relation (table) is unique, meaning no two rows can be identical
    In a table Students, the Student_ID column is a primary key, enforcing that each student has a unique identifier.   
        CREATE TABLE Students (
            Student_ID INT PRIMARY KEY,
            Name VARCHAR(50)
        );

3. A key constraint ensures that a set of attributes (a key) uniquely identifies each tuple in a relation.
    CREATE TABLE Orders (
        Order_ID INT,
        Product_ID INT,
        Quantity INT,
        PRIMARY KEY (Order_ID, Product_ID)
    );

4.  Entity Integrity Constraint:- no primary key attribute in a table can have a NULL value.
    CREATE TABLE Employees (
        Employee_ID INT PRIMARY KEY,
        Name VARCHAR(50)
    );
    Employee_ID can't be NULL.

5. Referential Integrity Constraint:- a foreign key value in one table must either be NULL or match a valid primary key value in another table
    CREATE TABLE Orders (
        Order_ID INT PRIMARY KEY,
        Customer_ID INT,
        FOREIGN KEY (Customer_ID) REFERENCES Customers(Customer_ID)
    );


        Functional Dependency

    The Functional Dependency is a relationship that exists between two attribute.
        It is typically exists between the primary key and non-key attribute within the table.

                X -> Y (x  is to y)
                i.e if X changes Y also changes.
            The left side of FD is known as determinat.
            The right side of the production is known as dependent
        Roll_no ---> NAME if roll no changes, name also changes.

    Type of Functional Dependency:

        Trivial Functional Dependency
        A -> B (if A is to B) has trivial Dependency ,if B is subset of A.

        A = {p,q,r,s}
        B = {q,r}
            B is subset of A
        
        Non-trivial Functional Dependency:
            if B is not subset of A.
            when A intersect B is NULL. complete non-trivial 

            emp_id, emp_name ---> emp_age (non-trivial)

    Closure of attribute

        R(A,B,C,D)
         A->B
         B->D
         C->B
         
         closure of attribute A i.e A+ (set of attribute which can be determine with A)
            A+ : A B D  Cl(A)={A,B,D}
