1. What are the main differences between MongoDB and relational databases?
    Relational Database : Data is split into tables with strict relatiionships. These relatiionships must be managed carefully, and chnages to the structure require significant updates.

    MongoDB : Everything is stored together in one document, making it flexible and easy to work with. 
              New field can be easily added without needing to changes the entire databases structure

        Feature        MongoDB                                    Relational databases
        Schema         No fixed structure                         Fixed structure, all records must follow the same format
        Transcation    Support basic Transcation                  Strong support for Transcation ensuring data reliability
        Best for       Application with varying data,real-time    Application needed complex query and structure data like banking system

2. What is the differences between a document and a collection in MongoDB ?

    Document :- A single entry in a MongoDB collection in BSON(Binary JSON ) format. it consists of field-value pairs, where fields are strings, and values can be various types.
        Document: { 
            "_id": 1,
            "name": "Alice", 
            "age": 25
         }.

    Collection :- It's is the grouping of document. it acts as a container for docuements , similar to a table in a relational database.
        Collection name: users.

3. What is a Replica Set in MongoDB?
    A replica set is a group of MongoDB servers that work together to ensuring data redundancy and high availability 
    It consists of one primary node and one more secondary node that replicate the primary node's data

    Read Operation:
        -> By default, all read operations are directed to the primary node to ensure data consistency.
        -> Secondary nodes can also handle read operations if explicitly configured using a read preference
            eg.
            // Default read (from primary)
                db.collection.find({ age: { $gte: 30 } });

            // Read from secondary
                db.collection.find({ age: { $gte: 30 } }).readPref("secondary");
    
    Write Operation:
        -> All write operations are handled by the primary node
        -> The primary node logs the operation in its oplog (operation log), and the secondaries replicate the change asynchronously.

4. How does MongoDB handle data consistence?
    
    1.Write consistency
        Levels: 
        w: 1 (default): Acknowledgment from the primary node only.
        w: "majority": Acknowledgment from a majority of nodes in the replica set.
        w: 0: No acknowledgment required (fire-and-forget mode).

            eg. db.collection.insertOne({ name: "Alice", age: 25 }, { writeConcern: { w: "majority" } });

    2. Read consistency
        Levels:
        local (default): Returns data from the node’s memory, not guaranteeing replication.
        majority: Ensures the data read is acknowledged by a majority of the nodes.
        linearizable: Guarantees the read operation reflects the most recent write.
        available: Returns data even if the node is not in sync.

        eg. db.collection.find({ name: "Alice" }).readConcern("majority");
    
    3.  Replica Sets
        The primary node handles all writes.
        The secondary nodes replicate data from the primary asynchronously.
        If the primary fails, a new primary is elected to ensure continuity.

    4. Transaction Support
        MongoDB supports ACID transactions for multi-document operations.
        Transactions ensure atomicity, consistency, isolation, and durability across multiple documents or collections.

5. What are indexes in MongoDB , and why are they important ?
    They work by storing a small portion of the data in a way that makes it quicker to search through.
    Indexes are similar to the index at the front book, which allows you to quickly locate a topic without having to read every page 

    it helps in 
        1. faster Query performance
        2. Efficient sorting 
        3. improved Filtering

6. Explain the concept of aggregation in MongoDB
    Aggregation operation allow us to transform and analyze data in a MongoDB collection

7. How does sharding work in MongoDB ?
    Sharding in MongoDB is a method used to distribute data accross multiple servers or "shards" to ensure that the database can handle large datasets and high traffic

8. What is the role of the ObjectInd in MongoDB documents?
    A 4-byte timestamps represent the creation time.
    A 5-byte random value(unique to the machine and process)
    A 3-byte incrementing counter(initialised to a random value)

9. How do you handle transcations in MongoDB ?
    Start a Session : const session = client.startSession();
    Start a Transaction : session.startTranscation();
    perform operation :
    commit the Transaction : await session.commitTranscation();
    End the session : session.endSession();